I'm very excited to introduce brain
TR enormously grateful to Adrian B and
to rway my my home and my family now um
and so I want to quickly tell uh what is
Brain Trust and why we invited Adrian B
for the first lecture uh read a little
bit because I'm
nervous uh so David started this project
uh last year of his life on ask of
extension Rebellion uh to basically put
together some positive proposal and not
only negative uh ones uh and he come
together with friends and they
brainstorming parties to uh to come up
with the solutions uh for the climate
change um and this is very much David
and hopefully very much us because we're
trying to continue this project so we
discussed a lot in the last years how
um how we find ourself trapped in a
series of uh Bleak social scenarios uh
one more depressing than another um but
we believe actually that
technologies that we need to protect
ourselves from climate change do exist
the question is why aren't we using them
and why do so few people know about them
why is Humanity wasting vast resources
on destructive practices instead of
developing those obviously useful to us
so it's look like it's was Thomas Hop's
right and humans do have an evil nature
so we don't think so uh here I want to
quote student of David Kristoff P um who
wrote that uh David Greer coined the
term Baseline communism to to describe
the fundamental principle of sharing
resources in mutual Aid that underlines
human social interaction grer emphasized
that Baseline communism exists in
various form and scales from small scale
communities to Global networks of
solidarity uh it emphasizes Act of
generosity communal sharing and the
recognition of common needs and interest
it changes the notion of humans uh that
so driven by self-interest and
asserted and assert that cooperation and
Collective action are integral to our
social
nature and this is why uh we are
launching our lecture series with
Professor Aran B the creature of most 3
printer all white um because uh I
believe um he put the idea of
human co-production and collaboration uh
as as a fundamental design for for his
project so it's very much about uh
social design as much as it's about uh
successful
engineering um and before I pass the
floor to Adrian I want to mention that
uh we deliberately come to the community
instead of going trying to arrange this
lectures at University or in some
silicone valy company or something like
that because um we believe that
technology exist but people don't use
them and so it's a big question why and
can we uh can we bring it to the
community so uh not only geeky people
programmers activists and so on uh use
the technology that um actually uh can
make communities autonomous from
existing system that is obviously
collapse um and J please thank you thank
you thank you very
much uh good evening everybody um
artificial just to distinguish from
things that are natural um the obvious
meaning of the word that we all know
namely things made by people as opposed
to things made by Nature um you can see
I'm an
updated um what I'm going to do is I'm
going to make some general remarks about
why I think certain systems behave in
the way they do uh and I'm talking here
about Technical Systems but in Technical
Systems having said artificial I'm also
going to include natural systems and
then I'm going to say a little bit about
the project which ni has kindly
mentioned uh that I started and how it
fits into that framework uh then I'm
going to say a bit about how as I'm an
engineer how this might progress
technically um and then look at the end
about how uh the ideas May spread uh so
anyway um let's start fairly broadly
with all of human history there it is on
one graph um human beings Homo sapiens
evolved 300,000 years ago well
archaeologists paleontologists keep
moving this dat backwards and that's
where it currently stands um and human
history is most of it rather unpleasant
as you can see um the top line is the
percentage of people living in absolute
poverty now it's pretty straight because
it's un estimate and the United Nations
weren't Gathering very many statistics
250,000 years ago um the red line on the
bottom here is life expectancy which
again is an estimate
um not everybody was dropping dead at
the age of 25 what the line here at 25
means is that life expectancy was such
that half of people people live to 50
and a half of people died when was Zero
anyway so extremely bad news news um I
put the invention of the bow and arrow
here my name is BOA um so that means a
maker of bows and I felt obliged for
family history reasons to stick down on
there 50,000 years ago uh so you can see
that I come from a long line of armament
manufacturers
um at the extreme right hand end though
things start to sort of improve a bit
now as soon as I saw that I thought well
that's got to be agriculture agriculture
is the thing that's got to have made the
distant difference there and started to
drop poverty and increase life
expectancy but but no not really um
we've had agriculture for about 12,000
years um so if we look at the right hand
end of the graph things are pretty much
the same for most of the history of
Agriculture um around about here we've
got the hand Indy in China or the Roman
Empire um uh in Europe um and uh things
haven't improved by the invention of
agriculture 12,000 years ago in the
fertile prestin
Mia okay so maybe it was the creation of
machines um let's look again zoom in on
the right hand end of the graph um we've
had machines for about 2,000 years we've
had oceangoing sailing ships we've had
uh Mills that grind corn and so on
driven by water wheels um we've had
horses and Cs and so on we've had
machines for a long time um uh and again
the creation of machines in themselves
doesn't seem to have made an awful lot
of difference so again we're going to
zoom in on the right hand end and the
thing that made the difference was the
Industrial Revolution now the industrial
revolution has caused a number of
problems with which you'll all be
familiar and which I won't bore you with
because you are all familiar with it um
or with them um but the one thing it did
was to drop poverty
extraordinarily um it used to be that
90% or more of human beings alive were
living in absolute poverty now the
figure is too big it's 9% but 9% I hope
we all agree is considerably better than
95% and simly life expectancy has grown
and now life expectancy is up around 17
on average for the whole human race um
and the thing that the Industrial
Revolution did as opposed to the
creation of machines like sailing ships
and horses and Cs and so on the thing
the Industrial Revolution did was to
have the idea that machine B would be
made by Machine a in other words you had
machines making machines that's the
thing that made it work uh instead all
these numbers on this graph the ones at
the left hand end which I was
extrapolating were extra by me but these
all come from our world in data oord
University okay so machines making
machines the way the world is currently
organized most machines most things like
the chairs are sitting on and made by
companies let's look at the world's
biggest companies and there's a list um
and we can see that these are all pretty
good example of trickle up economics um
the money comes from large numbers of
small people looking at the
occasional and trickles up to alphabet
at the top uh and they come out number
four on the list um apple is number one
as you'll probably be aware it's the
company with the biggest market
capitalization in the world now by big
here I'm talking about market
capitalization there are other ways to
measure bigness in companies but this is
a convenient way to Lear uh that's one
of Apple's first computers that's
Google's first landing page for Google
search that's the original tesra and on
these are the original products of those
companies and those companies some of
them do make things Apple certainly make
machines Microsoft makes some machines
and they also s sold software Saudi
aranco sells a lot of oil uh Google it's
not their main business make some
machines Amazon sell machines Nvidia
make nothing but machines they make
graphics chips which are of course also
the foundation of modern AI uh and so on
all the way down Tesla certainly made
machines so these are people making
machines using in the present day what
happened in the industrial revolution
but those are the world's biggest
companies surprisingly the world's
biggest industry though is this BL there
he
is um
agriculture perhaps unsurprisingly when
you think about it is actually the
world's biggest industry
it's bigger than those companies we saw
on the previous slide but there's an
interesting question here if that's the
world's biggest
industry why are no farming Industries
among the world's biggest companies
you'd expect all other things being
equal that the world's biggest industry
that we all engage in or at least use
the products of um would be one of those
that was appearing in that previous list
but it's not and that is inherently
surprising anyway I shall return to that
question in a
minute let's go back to looking at
making things um this is a pie chart you
may not you to sit there's a really thin
orange sliver there a bit of a pie chart
a great blue bit bit um um this is a pie
chart of global annual manufacturing
output um it's quite difficult to get
this in terms of mass in it you can get
all sorts of figures about money and so
on but but if you want to know what
actual metric tons are made uh anyway so
this is again to be taking the sight pin
of Sal because it's back an onvelope
calculation by me um something that I've
labeled l a big blue bit is 1.5 * 10^ 14
metric tons and then this is tiny little
bit which I've labeled NBL uh which is
about 5,000 times smaller what are those
two things well are these two
things um L is
life so that's your fingernails where
that is
um when you add it all up it's a lot
it's particularly a lot when you
remember things like in a year anual
manufacturing output bacteria which
reproduced every 8 hours make an awful
lot of mass um and the little MBL thing
is things made by life in other words
Birds making nests or mask making those
Motor Cars um and that is a much smaller
m
than the mass of stuff made by life
incidentally including in the made by
life there is all of our agricultural
produce as well as the stuff
while so if we look at made by life a
little bit basically what's happening
there is self-replicating machines Birds
you and me build things from stuff they
find lying about it's exactly the same
if you want to make a motor car as if a
b wants to make a nest the burger is out
find some t leaves it's a fluff and
builds a nest you want to make a motor
car you go out and you start by finding
a deposit V uh stuff that you find lying
about and it's pretty obvious when we
look at the difference between the
amount reduced by life and the amount
reduced by industry including non-human
industry um that self-replication things
copying themselves cells dividing um
allows vast weth creation compared to
industrial
production so we've got this
extraordinary way of making wealth and
making stuff um that's out in the world
and that by and large well we certainly
don't use it at all making
mot now my contention is and it is only
a hypothesis I don't have any proof for
this that the reason why
farming the world's most large most
large the world's biggest industry uh
doesn't have any representatives in
those list of big industrial companies
is because an awful lot of people can
use
self-replication it's pretty easy you do
need some land of course and not
everybody's got access to land but it's
pretty easy to grow stuff all you need
is a few seeds possibly some eggs if you
want to hatch some chickens or whatever
um and because nearly anyone can use
self- replication it keeps production
distributed in comparatively small units
now there are big agricultural companies
companies might senent on but
nonetheless they don't feature in that
really big list that I showed you before
as I say this is only a hypothesis by me
I don't have any demonstrable proof for
it um but it seems at least reasonable
to suspect that it might be the
case Okay so we're talking about stuff
and I mentioned that those companies
before were fine examples trickle up
economics where they take tiny amounts
from everybody and that trickles up form
a great big pile of cash at the top um
as we all know uh the one of the tenants
of Marxism is that in order to prevent
that from happening and leading to
Greater inequality um the Necessities
for the general population to seize the
means of production now in fact as far
as I can tell neither Marx nor am ever
say the phrase sees the means of
corruption that was said by sociology
American sociology School William first
um Marx talked about workers must own
the means of production of course he
also talked about the idea that
revolutions are inevitable well they're
not inevitable some count some but um he
didn't and people have conflated the
idea of Revolution with people seizing
the means of production for obvious
reasons but nonetheless I'm not sure
that he ever actually talked about that
explicitly anyway besides the point
really uh but nonetheless a small
semantic semantic one nonetheless
anyway if we want to distribute stuff
equally then more people need to own the
means of production the problem is when
seizing the means of production is put
into practice uh one of the things that
gets produced is a lot of
cuses uh which clearly we want to avoid
so how can we go about using the power
of self- replication for biology to
distribute the means of ruction how can
we use the way biology does things by
dividing and multiplying in order to
replace possibly some of the way that we
do things in a conventional Factory as
on the right
there well that brings me to the project
which is the reason why I was invited
here this evening which is the rep rap
project uh rep WP I'll explain the
meaning of in a moment but it's a partly
in Brackets self-replicating 3D printer
and here's a design of one of the
machines there are many design of these
machines hundreds of designs of these
machines out there now uh This was done
by a guy called John mullik uh despite
the fact that rep R was my project I've
never met John mullik uh I've never even
spoken to him uh he designed this
machine based on the principle of
project everything in that machine
that's red blue or white can be printed
by the machine itself so the machine is
capable of self-replication by producing
a kit in its own Parts not quite
everything could be printed for example
this W that runs up here machine can't
make that I buy that in and there are
one or two bits around here and down
here this black it uh that need to be
bought but all those bits that you can't
print in the machine itself are
organized so that anyone can buy them
online pretty much anywhere in the world
they're all standard bits of engineering
stuff that you just order from uh an
online
shop I said I'd expain what rep RP means
it's short for replicating Rapid
prototyper um it used to be the case
that 3D printers are called rapid
prototypers back about 20 years ago uh
rapidly moving field and so the names
change uh they're called additive
manufacturing machines rapid prototypers
but most people call 3D printers because
it's an immediately visually graspable
idea 3D printer it's a thing that makes
a threedimensional object PL for
computer um now when I started the
project the first thing I did was to
decide to give it all the way free as
open source uh this is a computer in
front of you that's running the Linux
operating system that's an open source
operating system that anyone can know
nothing I was going to put all the
designs to this machine all the software
that controls it um all the
documentation on online for anybody to
take a copy of and the reason I did this
uh was because it seemed to me that it
was potentially a powerful idea a
self-replicating manufactur machine and
that a good wave to make bad things
happen would be to try and restrict it
um and you'd have a small group of
people who would be able to use the
machine in its restricted State i' been
M I get rich right but n the whole L
other people anyway after i' had that
rather uncharacteristically Noble
thought about Distributing it free so
that everybody could have access to it I
suddenly realized that if you got a
self-copying
machine logic sort of compells you to
give it away because
if it copies it you only sell one um as
soon as someone's got one they can use
it to make another um now that's not
quite the case as we'll see but
nonetheless um the whole idea of
self-replication uh is intrinsically
uncontainable if I try to patent it what
I would be saying is I want to spend the
entire rest of my life in court trying
to stop people from doing my idea the
one thing it was intended to do which is
insane it would be insane if I on that
PA which fortunately I didn't so as you
can tell I'm completely safe um anyway
uh I decided to give it all the way free
and because it seemed like potentially
rather powerful idea I got my University
to put out press saying that this is
what I was going to do because I thought
it was if we' got a p idea that's coming
along Le deserve to tell people deserve
to be told about it before it happens uh
and so this got picked up by the BBC by
the the Hindustan Times by CNN and all
sorts of other people
um all over the world uh literally in
New Zealand on the opposite side of the
world um elsewhere and as a result of
all this press coverage when I started
the project in 2005 um a whole load of
volunteers came along and said oh that's
a really neat idea can we help and so
this was great because suddenly from me
and my research student who was what I
started with and I thought we would the
two people who were going to design the
first machine suddenly we had an
expanding resource of researchers all
working on the project now these
researchers had two significant
advantages one is they volunteered so
they were really Keen uh two is they
didn't cost any money and so I said yes
to everybody basically and so everybody
started designing these machines and
going off in all sorts of different
directions so the thing gradually
curless and curless ground in design
that machine there on the right is the
second generation of the red R you'll
see the first one
anyway the result of all this activity
was that we got the thing working and as
you'll see in a minute we got it to
reproduce itself and we put the
reproduce Parts together to make another
machine and it all sort of took off and
in fact most 3D printers made in the
world are either rep wraps or rep wrap
derivatives in other words they're
people who've uh they're made by
companies or they're made by individuals
who've used the rep W data in order to
make
them okay another aspect to the way in
which I came through the to the idea was
entirely a biologically inspired one um
at the time I was working in the
biometics group at B University
biometics is copying ideas from nature
out out of nature into engineering and
what I wanted to do was to copy
something that biologists called
symbiotic mutualism that most people in
general public call symbiosis um the
most famous example of symbiosis is is
the flowering plants and the insects um
um this goes way back to the late
Jurassic invol very early it's being
going from strength to strength every
every minute and we all know how this
works from school we know that plants
must move their pollen plants themselves
don't move uh the bee must eat um and
the plant pays the bee with food to move
the pollen essentially the bee visits
the flour to get the nectar and as an
inadvertent consequence of doing that
takes the pollen offto the next flow and
this is what just call an evolutionarily
stable strategy for both in other words
it's at an evolutionary point which it's
very difficult to evolve away from
because it works so
well and human beings of course get
involved in symbiotic mutualisms as well
and going back to agriculture again are
most famous one is agriculture um cows
and wheat must have somewhere to grow
and to
reproduce and people must eat and so we
provide the cows and the wheat uh with
somewhere to grow and reproduce and they
repay us just like
FR just like the flowers of the nectar
they repair Us in milk and of course
meat literally they repairs in their own
corpses um bread and so on from the
wheat um but of course Evolution doesn't
really care about individuals dying as
long as they reproduced successfully and
if we look for example at a fairly
well-known agricultural animal the
chicken um sure we eat chicken but
chickens are also evolutionarily the the
single most successful bird that has
ever existed there are 25 billion
chickens on Earth that's more birds of
that species than any other ever and the
reason is because they have a symbotic
relationship with the most powerful
organism that's ever lived and this
again is an evolutionarily stable
strategy for both us and for the animals
and plants that we use in our
Agriculture and I set up R rat to work
in the same way here we've got the r rat
machine and the second generation one I
showed you before and as I mentioned you
have to put the parts together after it
printed them this particular one also
uses thread rolls that you can buy from
being C so that's easy so from the rep
wrap machine's perspective in order to
reproduce it needs to be assembled
something it can't do just as the plant
can't move its pooid so and people need
to have Goods we need to have I don't
know coat hooks or cat flaps or some
other plastic object that we might want
um so what the rep rap machine does is
it pays the people in the good they want
by manufacturing those goods for them in
order for those people to help it to
reproduce in other words the r r
machines taking the role of the flows
the people are taking the role of the
bees and the goods the machine makes are
taking the role of the nectar from the
plow once again I rather hope that this
would turn out to be an evolutionarily
stable strategy for both as it were
species I don't really consider r r shet
to be a species but can be certain
um and of course one of the interesting
things about this you'll notice is that
it doesn't actually involve any money
anywhere now of course you need to SP a
little bit of money to make one these
machines because it doesn't reproduce
all of its own Parts you need to buy
some bits in from elsewhere but Point
nonetheless
stands okay so anyone with a plant can
grow SE for a
friend and anyone with a rep R machine
can make another rep R machine for a
friend and this is a picture of the very
first time the machine replicated on the
29th May
2008 uh that's the original machine and
you'll see that again in a little while
and that's me and the guy over there is
one of the volunteers on the project
from New Zealand a guy called Vic Oliver
and that machine made the parts of that
machine and so excitedly on the 29th of
May finished putting that one together
it didn't
work but we
discovered we discovered that we had
made a stupid mistake that had nothing
to do with the machine company itself
you can't really see it all that clearly
but there's a belt a tooth belt that
runs around the machine there that
drives this platform up and down and um
and we' cut the belt too long like fools
which we are um and we discovered that
if you just took a screwdriver and held
it against the belt to tension it then
the machine worked fine so great thought
we sat down at the computer we designed
a belt tensioner on the computer's
computer a design system uh got this
machine to manufacture it boled it onto
that machine and and then that machine
work fine from then on so with
self-replication you get self-repair for
free just as you as a self-replicating
organism get self- repair sort it for
free if you cut your hand your cells all
Marsh themselves and start reproducing
in order to put your hand back together
again it didn't stay in individual hands
this
machine there are many individuals who
make them and many individuals who swap
them amongst themselves but there are
also companies that have taken up the
idea um this is a company in the C
Republic owned by a guy called yoseph
Brer um and he has a warehouse full of
repat machines all printing more
machines which he assembles puts in
cardboard boxes charges people $600 and
ships them
out and it literally is a farm it's like
breeding chickens it's doing the same
sort of thing um one of the advantages
of this strategy from his perspective
several two of them I going mention the
first one is um that uh because he's
using his machines in production in vast
numbers he's got a really strong
incentive to make it reliable what you
don't want to be doing is going down and
swapping out every third machine every
two days so his design is one of the
most reliable in the world simply as it
were by evolution
because he's made it more and more he's
designed out all the things that made
them
unreliable um
and the second big advantage that he's
got because he's not to make plastic
parts using the way the plastic parts
are conventionally made which is
conjection molding that's how this cup
was made you make a Dye the shape of
this with a hollow in shape this cup you
square plastic into it costs about
5,000 to make such a die
uh which inent is about 10 times the
cost of a rep R machine but once you
made that design die it can only make
that cup
forever you can change the design on
these things for the machine when you've
got an improvement literally in 20
minutes so it's really very neat when it
comes to updating the mechanical parts
of the machine there are other companies
that run similar
Farms okay so a little bit of stuff
about 3D printing itself um it's the
second most versatile manufacturing
technology we know about or we have you
might immediately ask what's the first
um that's back to the thing we were just
talking about maybe objects items living
organisms grow um the most ver way of
making anything that we know about is
grass growing oak trees growing whales
growing but 3D printing is the second
most versatile and I just wanted to say
a few words about why that is the case
um and to see why it's the case we have
to ask another question why is it the
most second most versatile and the
question we have to ask is how difficult
is it to make something like this cup or
this computer or those chairs um and
broadly speaking there there are a few
more but broadly speaking we have two
ways as human beings to make something
uh the first way is basically a computer
controlled electric drill what we do is
we have an electric drill sitting here
with a drill bit sticking in it spins
around and around and then we move it
around in space of the computer and it
cuts the object we want made out of a
solid block like a sculpture chicking
something out of mar uh now that's
what's called obviously for obvious
reason called a subtractive process we
subtracting material Mak things you want
um 3D printers on the other hand are
basically a computer control glue gun
what we've got is plastic coming out of
a little nozzle here and we scribble the
first layer of the object we want on a
flat plate and then we move up a little
bit scribble the next layer scribble the
next layer we're building up layer lay
layer layer layer by layer by layer um
in other words that's an adjective not a
subtractive process and being an
adjective process uh it's much more like
a sculpture putting something together
out of clay starting with nothing and
building it up
um now obviously if we're going to make
something by one of those two processes
we' have to have some sort of
description of the shape of the thing
that we want to make so when I said how
difficult diffult is it to make
something what we've got to consider is
how just simple or complicated shapes
sorry how simple and complicated what
try and actually say what this is on
slide what does simple and complicated
mean to solid shapes in other words what
is a difficult problem when it comes to
make something what is an easy problem
when it comes to making something well
the first way things are easy this is a
diagram drawn by an old friend of mine
for a text what years and years ago
which I just nicked for putting in this
talk um the first is what technical
people call combinatorial complexity
forget about making things at the moment
if you've got a thousand names and you
want to sort them into alphabetical
order and computer that takes a certain
amount of time pretty obviously it's
going to take longer for it to assort a
million names it turns out it's not all
that much longer but nonetheless longer
um and that's an example of
combinatorial complexity the more things
you have to deal with the more
complicated the thing you've got to do
is but three-dimensional solid shapes
can be complicated in another other way
uh there's the dimension here which is
at right angles to combinatorial
complexity which is analytical
complexity does the object you want to
make consist entirely flat surfaces or
does it have fancy curving shapes like I
don't know an airplane wing or something
described by complicated pieces of
algebra in other words we've got sort of
algebra along that axis is it a bendy
thing or is it a nice straight thing and
finally and this is the key one there's
dimensional complexity if we look at
shape like this even though it's got
thickness it's essentially a
two-dimensional shape this is a more
complicated two-dimensional shape but
something like this object here is a
fully threedimensional shape so we've
got two Dimensions going up to three
dimensions along that axis now when we
have to make these things that
dimensional axis is the thing that
really kills us um dimensional
Simplicity is the key to making
something here's a turbine blade being
manufactured by the electric drone
machine that I mentioned and that's the
drill bit which has got to be moved
around in space uh you might imagine
that solving that problem for the
computer will be a three-dimensional
problem you've got a three-dimensional
object the computer work visualizes and
the Machine has got to cut it out but no
uh not only do we have to move the end
of this cutting tool and and the
electric grill around front and back
left right up and down that's three
dimensions it's also possible to twist
it about those axes so that's another
dimension another dimension and another
dimension now the final one I mentioned
twisting about the axis of the drill
itself doesn't count because the drill
itself is spinning so it's actually a
five-dimensional problem that you've got
to solve in order to cut an object out
in one of those cutting
machines and the one thing you can tell
if you've got anything to do with
computers as you number as the number of
Dimensions increases in the problem
you're trying to solve the difficulty of
the problem increases incredibly hardre
incred incredibly great um and in fact
it's the case that these
machines there are shapes that we know
they could make but we don't know how to
tell them to make them in other words it
this machine or these machines have
capabilities that we cannot exploit
they're physically capable of doing it
but we just don't know how to tell them
to do it we're getting better and better
at it but nonethless that's still the
case but now think about 3D printing you
remember I said it built things up in
layers we're only ever de with a
two-dimensional
problem in other words we've taken a
five-dimensional problem in this
technology and reduced it to a
two-dimensional problem for 3D printing
all 3D printers are capable of making
every physical object that can be
described to them because it's really
easy to De to deal with slices through
things that's straight forward
computation so that's the reason why 3D
printing is so versatile because it's so
easy to
program okay so having said a bit about
3D printing and how I got to the idea of
a self-replicating 3D printer that could
be shared by anyone who wanted it um
let's spend a little bit of time looking
at where we might go next and now these
are mainly my ideas this is not in any
way a sort of authoritative survey where
everything's going in the industry um
it's just some thoughts of mine uh
things that I dream D or whatever so uh
here's nothing to do 3D printing this is
CT scanner some of have been put through
one times um you know how it works
you've got a big rotating x-ray machine
here which shines x-rays through the
patient who sits there and any
individual beam of x-rays doesn't tell
you very much but if you take the
whole rotation of the machine and take
every x-ray from every direction you can
use that to reconstruct a slice through
the patient and there's a lungs over
there on the
right well there's a very clever 3D
printer that essentially reverses that
process it was designed by the people of
Berkeley and
limore um and the way to imagine how it
works is this first of all you need a
liquid resin that sets when you shine
light on it and that's no big deal any
of you have ever had any Dentistry will
know that it's possible to have resins
that set when you shine light on them
because that's what f fings in your
teeth um so what we do is we take a
cylinder a cylindrical tank transparent
and we fill it up with that resin and
then essentially what we do is we
project light into that tank from
different directions depending upon what
the object would look like from that
direction and there are a few subes uh
the way in which it actually works is to
use one of those the op projector uh you
have put a lens in front to make sure
that the beam comes out parallel as
supposed to spreading out like the beam
that's currently Illuminating the screen
and you rotate the tank you don't retake
the projector and the final cover trick
is that if you just had a cylindrical
tank of course the cylindrical tank
would act as a lens when the light was
going through it and everything had get
distorted so they put a rectangular tank
around it filled with a liquid which is
exactly matches the refractive index of
the resin so the light just goes
straight through without bending and you
can make threedimensional objects that
way B with basically a single moving
part namely the rotation of that
tank I thought that was a really clever
idea so I decided to get rid of the
moving
part and how I did it sorry let me re
let me rewind from how I did it how I
have intend to do it and so how far have
only simulated it so this is not a real
physical object this is something that
just exists as a piece of
computation of mathematics um going back
to the CT scanner there's an alternative
which you can do not with live people
for obvious reasons but with dead
samples which is to use electrical
resistance instead of the x-rays what
you do is you have a tank you fill it
out with salty water which conducts
electricity you put some in this case
it's rabbit lungs you drop some rabbit
lungs into it and if you did a CT scan
of them it looked like that but when you
pass the electric current between these
electrodes which you can see distributed
in a ring you can also build up a rather
cruder picture of the lungs and that's
thing that's made by a company called
Spectrum uh so what I thought was well
why not take that idea take a tank put
electrodes all over its surface fill it
up with a resin that doesn't set with
light but sets when you pass an electric
current through it and then use a
computer to send it electric currents
between Pairs of the electrodes all over
the surface of that cylinder and and
build a solid object entirely inside the
volume by the electricity passing
through the resin and causing it to
set uh anyway I thought of it four years
or so ago and I've been playing around
with the idea ever since uh the nice
thing about it is it has no moving Parts
at all um and it will print an entire
object in one shot IDE very quickly I
don't see a reason why it shouldn't be
very quickly U but on the other hand as
I say it is highly speculative relies on
many F assumptions so far it's only been
simulated um the first problem you get
when you try and simulate it is this
imagine that's the tank imagine taking a
slice through the tank so you're just
looking at one circular slice not the
whole tank and this circle here ignore
the flat bit that's just AR plotting prr
this circle here that you can roughly
see is a circle across the tank and what
I've done is to tell the thing to solve
all the partial differential equations
that work out what happen when you pass
an electric current between Pairs of
electrodes on opposite sides basically
we take two of electrodes opposite pass
the current through them go around to
the next pair next PA and all the way
around and the first thing is
immediately obvious is that when you try
and do that it sets solid around the
edge and stays liquid in the middle
which is obviously exact opposite of
what you want to happen so we need some
way to fix that how many of you have
ever used lock tide On
th it's a really clever idea
it's that blue liquid at the top there
if you put Loctite on the screw thread
and then put a nut on it and tighten it
up the Loctite is a liquid and it's a
liquid resin that sets solid in the
absence of oxygen that oxygen in and it
goes liquid again so what you do is you
put liquid locti in the thread you
tighten the nut up and it sets solid and
it locks the nut stops it vibrating
loose the big problem for the guy
inventing it I should be able remember
his name but that can't was not so much
in the resin it was inventing a bottle
that let oxygen in uh because you need
that in order for it to come out of the
nozzle at the end uh anyway there's no
reason why we shouldn't use the same
trick to make a resin that is actually
solid when there's no electricity going
through it and becomes liquid when you
start passing an electric current
through it in other words it's the
opposite of what we had before so what
that does is to take our solid around
the edge liquid in the middle problem
and turn it into liquid around the Ed
and solid in the
middle um which is kind of nice uh and
you can now run the simulator put a
whole series of voltages across the
thing and build a whole series of
cylinders inside the cylindrical tank a
different radi depending on what voltage
you put in now this graph is actually
back backwards the voltage is the
independent variable and the radius is
the dependent variable the reason I put
them backward the voltage up the y- AIS
and the radius along the x- AIS come
apparent the moment but anyway you stick
a load of voltages in and you put a big
voltage in you get a small radius
unsurprisingly because more of it stays
liquid you put a little voltage in and
you get a big radius that's the
curve now we can use that curve to drive
the machine so we want to make a
rectangular block we can figure out how
the rectangular block is solid across a
radial line and then put the right
voltage in as we go around and around to
make see and that's about as far as it's
got at the moment so we can use the
graph from the simple cylinders to
figure out how to make machine make
complication shapes anyway I've been
blogging all this and open sourcing it
it's gone along if someone wants to have
a play around with it you're welcome to
do so and in particular if you put know
resin chemist you can make a resin
becomes more liquid when you pass
electricity through it let me
know now one of the things about this
technology is that you do need to be a
bit of a nerd in order to use it not
stuff I just talking about the 3D
printing in general um what we really
like to do is the way we make pictures
now which is just to tell an AI what
picture we want you know I want a
picture of Adrian Boer standing on the
cliff looking down at the sea go away
generates a picture of me from all
pictures of me that happen online
um how are we going to be able to tell a
3D printer what to print just using
ordinary conversational language well
this is one potential way of doing it
that I sort of dreamed up um but there
may well be other possibilities um this
is nothing to do with AI this is a
conventional computerated design design
done by an architect or a building the
building doesn't exist but nonetheless
this design exists inside the computer
as a three-dimensional representation
made by a human being in the ordinary
way that human beings go about designing
things so this is non-existent
architecture architecture and the
three-dimensional um computer design
software free software called blender
there are several free 3D design
programs around that's one of them um
now I thought this is an interesting
building let's see if I can recreate it
in two Dimensions so Canon AI reproduce
that building I logged into my account
on a mid journey and I described a
picture to it the exact description I
gave it was this a glass fronted single
story building on a street corner with a
sinusal roof and a large helical Glass
Tower projecting from that roof view
from across the street aspect ratio
2:1 and it came out with this
immediately now it's not the same as the
thing just seen but I think you can see
that they're related um and that took me
very little time indeed from having the
idea to actually having these two
fixures in front of me took me 1 minute
and 30 seconds time um but this isn't a
3D design mid Journey generates pictures
two-dimensional things it knows
doesn't know how know anything it sort
of knows about perspective it knows
about shading it knows about Skies it
knows about all sorts of things but um
nonetheless what it's done is to make a
two-dimensional image but what we want
is a real 3D design which we can then
print how we going to do that well in
order to do that I think what we could
do is use AI called a generative
adversarial Network Gan for sure um
forget the bit at the top of the moment
a bit down bottom and forget about
making models of solid objects minute
let's suppose we want to make pictures
of faces um with the we generator uh
adver network works is this uh it has a
piece of AI software that's useless that
makes a picture of a face now this one's
actually quite a good face but initially
when it starts this would be rubbish it
might have two dots for the eyes are
nothing else but it has another a ey
over here which is the generator of
adversarial generative adversarial
Network critic and what that does is to
compare it with a billion real faces um
and say that's rubbish so the generally
has another go and it goes round and
around this Loop until it comes up with
some pretty good looking
faces um and this space is actually a
generat that human being never
[Music]
existed um so that's how a generate vver
serial network works and now set this up
and incidentally these two things both
learn at the same time this is learning
how to make faces this is also learning
how to be a better and better critic as
this gets better and better this gets
more and more picky um and so the whole
thing is in a positive feedback loop uh
going around and around making things
more and more
realistic okay how can we use that to
make three-dimensional designs well
let's stick with the architecture for a
minute make me a building to print well
we essentially go through the same
process with a couple of extra steps um
we have the generator bers Network
generator and what that does is to make
thing called a c script in other words
it's a computer program that you feed
into a conventional three-dimensional
design program and that
three-dimensional design program then
makes a representation of solid object
in the computer and from that the C
system Compu design system can make a
picture so that was the picture that was
made by the C
system and similarly at the same time we
also ask me journey to make a picture
from our description and it does that
and here is the critic that before told
us what the faces were in good or not
this one tells us whether that is
anything like that and the thing goes
round and around the training Loop until
this gets really good at making
three-dimensional objects that make
pictures that look like what mid Journey
does and once you've done that you've
got a thing that'll make
threedimensional design from just a text
description so you say draw me a
building to print to have a little bit
more detail on that and once the whole
thing have been trained it goes into the
generative adversary Network can system
and it comes out with a design for the
building but notice because we're
working with pictures the thing can
equally well work with a A Sketch you
can feed an image into this thing
because that's what it started with um
and so youve sort of killed two birds
with one stone
uh why Prismatic well it's because it's
doing the opposite of the problem which
I said 3D printing solves of reducing
dimensionality you start with a piece of
onedimensional tech extrem ones and
zeros it's one dimens or one
dimensional um and that then goes to two
Dimensions the system that generates
pictures generates a two dimensional
picture or we take a two-dimensional
sketch to start off with and this thing
then prismatically rejects the
dimensions up again U because this will
ultimately generate 3D CPT for so I call
it Prismatic because the AI extrudes the
dimensionality of the
unform okay let's finish up by looking
at a traditional economic idea which is
economies of scale um here's an obvious
example of an economy of scale go right
back Smith of course this um that's a
17th century iron Foundry two centuries
later this is what an iron Foundry like
and this is a much more efficient way of
making bits of bent steel than this for
the reason that people can specialize
and they've got large scales they one
person looks after the furnace one
person does the accounts all that sort
of thing so that is economically more
sensible than lots and lots of those but
something that's not often mentioned
when it comes to economies of scale is
that it goes into
reverse when you've got cheap and simple
simple technology that reverses
economies of scale so sticking with the
19th century if we were all living in
the 19th century we'd be sending our
laundry off the laundry in the town
where it would be processed through
laundry that looks like this let's do
that now because we've all got a robot
in our kitchen that does our laundry for
it um and the interesting thing about
that robot in our kitchen is that not
only is it our laundry for us we're
quite happy for it to sit there for 95%
of the time doing absolutely nothing we
you pay 400 qub for it and it doesn't do
anything for us 95% of the time that
doesn't bother us because it's so
convenient for doing our laundry another
example uh electrical power used to be
made in things that look like that still
of course is to a greater or less extent
but nowadays I've got a pass station on
my
roof um one of the advantages that comes
from this
distribution that goes against economies
of scale is that it gives convenience
and robustness if my washing machine
breaks down I can ask my neighbor if I
can borrow his or hers to wash my
clothes um similarly if this power
station goes offline a whole County goes
dark if my solar panels stop working
then at most my house is in convenient
so distributed systems are inherently
more robust and often more convenient
too in this case the convenience is we
don't actually have to bother about
laundry in the middle of town and in
this case the convenience is we don't
have to pay such a big electricity bill
so what things have we already
distributed well I suspect you all
everybody in the developed world has
their own CD pressing plant their own
photographic lab and their own printing
press of course they look nothing like
the traditional versions of those three
things they all look like this object
because this object has subsumed those
three industrial activities into itself
and personalized it and distributed it
amongst all of
us so if we do that why shouldn't people
have their own Factory and if people are
going to have their own Factory let's
have a factory that makes more
factories copies
itself so self replication is inherently
distributive and works against
concentration I maintain going right
back to that example of the farmer in
his field um not being being part of the
world's biggest industry but not being
one of part of one of the world's
biggest
companies
uh finally we're in London if you want
to see the very first rep rap machine
that looks like that it's current the
science museum um we call it Darwin the
origin species um so as I say you can go
and see it if you want just down the
road and if you're interested in any
more Point phones at that thank you all
very
much
um yeah thank you so much anyone have
any questions yes okay so we please
questions from the anybody and then I
will ask somebody
yeah it's very
interesting mostly it's like plastic or
resin um is it like replicate metallic
like CNC machines inre inly yes not the
vast majority of 3D printers as you say
work with plastics uh but quite a few of
them work with
Ceramics and that's really useful
because you can once you fired the
ceramic you've got something that with
stand very high temperatures so you can
make for example a mold and cast metal
in it which is very useful and
increasingly we've got metal machines
coming along as well the way they work
is that they tend to have particles of
metal embedded in the plastic that the
machine prints with and you then as with
the ceramic you fire it an a kill the
plastic all Burns away and the metal
fuses together and you end up with a
printed metal object that's cented
together so you're right mostly plastic
but increasingly other
materials any other
questions so what's the um is it is the
rep currently a standardized size or
does it is it able to make uh is like
one of those several
cubic typical size of the machine
without the back would be about the size
of the bottom of that chair there so
forget the back of the chair that side
but uh two things people make them quite
small there are machines that are about
this big uh there's a little machine
just come out people have design or some
guys design called Baby Belt printer
which is about that big
um people make big ones as well for
obvious reasons you can print a big
thing but the really clever thing that I
just saw literally a week ago is that
some guys have made a rep RP machine
that's
self-expanding so if you imagine the
machine printing suppose suppose this
tabletop where it was printing uh it
scribbles on the tabletop and it moves
up a bit scribbles on N scribbl next
there in addition what their machine
does in the four corners where it's
printing once it gets to a certain
height is it starts printing extra screw
thread for it to wind itself up on so it
can literally grow all the way up to the
ceiling and it's a rectangular shape
like this which means that the rectangle
you can fit in it can be arbitrarily
long you then take a long rectangle that
it's made turn put it on its side and
you can then print a machine that's a
square that's out it's as I say it's a
self-expanding r r they have haven't got
it working yet though they got elements
of they got the screw thread printing
bit working which is really clever um
and so there's the potential for these
machines actually to print something
bigger than
themselves not not actualized
yet
um well I've heard that people use them
use the machines to make guns and does
that is that true and does that bother
you
well uh well it bothers me in the
absolute sense that I don't think it's a
good idea to make guns anyway um it as
from the perspective of 3D printing
technology it doesn't bother me very
much because um if you and I see you are
if you were a terrorist who wanted to
make guns um and you came to me for my
engineering advice uh my engineering
advice would be forget 3D printing by
lathe now you've been able to buy lthe
for 200 years metal working lthe and if
you want to make guns you buy lathe you
don't don't worry with 3D printer um so
is it a bit of a myth then in that well
it's not a myth in particular people
make the non-firing bits of guns like
stock and like the bit that holds the
trigger mechanism and so on um now those
are Parts which are both more
complicated in shape than the barrel and
the breach and so on but also uh are not
subject to the same stresses as this the
barrel obviously is because it's got to
withstanding floating gases um so yes
people do print bits of guns um but um
people have been able to make guns for
as I say ever since the dawn of the
Industrial Revolution the interesting
thing today about manufacturing guns and
here we are living in a country of 65
million people is that surprisingly know
not many people do it even though it's
it's been possible for centuries to do
it not many people do in
actual so just time the talk that was
quite some time ago um you also
mentioning that freezy printer may be
used to
manufacture uh drugs like medicine not
directly but yes one of the things that
it's quite easy to make with a 3D
printer are what are called fluidic
devices that is to say plastic objects
with channels through them where
different fluids can flow and reaction
Chambers where chemical reactions can
occur and you can print things that will
act as little pumps to move material
around these things and so so what you
can do is you can print a miniature
chemical manufacturing plant and once
you've got that of course assuming it's
capable deal with the chemistry one
you've got something that will make
drugs for you either legitimate or
illegitimate um an interesting aspect of
that an interesting difference
incidentally between countries in Europe
and countries and the United States is
that patent law is different in the two
countries if in in this country in the
rest of Europe you make something for
your own use even if that thing's
patented you're perfectly entitled to do
that what you're not allowed to do is to
sell it you're not allowed to make any
money by making it but you are allowed
to make things for your s of page not
true in the United States uh you can't
make things for yourself even even if
you're not going to make any money out
it's a now of course what that means is
that if youve got a little chemical
partant in your kitchen that will make a
patented drug as long as it's only for
your own use company patented drug can't
back to question about material that can
be used yeah um do you know of any
examples that have been using biobased
materials yes yes in fact I I I built
such a machine about five or six years
ago for for another company um uh the
way that tends to work is they have
instead of melting plastic and having
having it come out of a nozzle and
building with that they tend to have a
computer controlled sying where the
needle lays down the material um and you
can take for example a gel that has
living cells embedded in it and you can
build that up into a pattern and so
people have used 3D printers to build
scaffolds uh for living organisms to
grow in uh
and there have been there's a 3D printed
bladder that was made for a rabbit for
example
um as an experiment um what the rabbit
thought about it is not recording we
might have doubts about that but
nonetheless we do need medicine
um and so yes is is the short answer
there's a rather nice uh design of 3D
printed biological material which was
done by a guy called Josh um I can't
remember his second Josh um what he does
if you imagine putting sugar into a 3D
printer sugar of course melts and you
can print with it as if it were plastic
so he what he does is he prints a
three-dimensional tracery of sugar solid
sugar paths in space forming thing that
looks like a bunch of wool come together
um then he puts a gel around that which
contains cells that form blood vessel
walls and because cells like sugar they
all migrate to the surface of these
sugar cylinders and form a cell of
all through this object so what you've
got is a blood supply system in three
dimensions that started off as a load of
candy
floss and then turns into a piece of
material which might one day perhaps be
transplanted into a
patient maybe a slightly metaphysical
question but um best kind I assume you
know about the paper clip um so just in
the context of like this discussion in
artificial intelligence about whether
like what's the responsible use of this
what's the potential sort of future
catastrophic implications of it or what
not yeah I'm kind of curious if you have
a of worry or self replicating machines
no um I have two two reasons that I'm
not worried about artificial
intelligence self-replicating machines
let's deal with the self-replication
machines first of all um for the last 3
and a half billion years on this planet
everything has been up to its knes in
self-replicating machines
self-replicating machines are the one
thing things we really know how to deal
with uh indeed our oldest industry is
entirely founded on self-replicating
machines we call it farming as I
mentioned earlier so I'm not worried
about self-replication as a threat
because as I say it's something we
really know how to deal with um as far
as AI is
concerned um people seem to be most
concerned about the idea of artificial
general intelligence which is say an AI
which haven't got yet which is clever of
the human being um in general
but the reason I'm not too bothered
about that is that we have forget about
artificial general intelligence we have
8 billion General intelligences on the
surface of the planet all right they
cause a lot of trouble but they do a lot
of good as well um and again we know all
about how to deal with intelligent other
agents it as human beings dealing with
intelligent other agents is the thing we
learn start to learn as soon as we're
born and it's probably the one thing
that human beings are really expert at
um every human being I mean some more
than others of course but intelligence
and
self-replication both aspects of the
natural world intelligence of course far
more rare than self-replication the vast
majority of things that self-replicate
don't even have
R sorry um yeah I I was just
wondering what you kind of think
about the future of copyright and and
I've been reading a little bit about
copy
you know recently and stuff and you know
well AI obviously is sort of throwing a
spanner in the current system that we
have that you
know you know if you get an AI to write
a film script who has the copyright on
script that's yeah exactly yeah and it's
hearten seeing stuff from elsewhere and
stuff like that I'm never being worried
about I don't understand why people are
worried about that every writer doesn't
get to be a writer unless they've read
several thousand books why is it wrong
that an AI reads thousands of books in
order to be a writer as well why is why
is that different can someone explain
what difference is it it's it's yeah
it's good point but um sorry anyway I I
like like um I mean it's funny sort of
the copyright stuff we have at the
moment that
like you know I mean well it was
actually it began apparently as a
censorship and you know book books they
were trying to censor books and then um
they sort of only let you know one
publisher publish a particular book and
they did that for 50 years and then sort
of stopped the the censorship and then
the publisher was like hold on you know
I've got a monopoly on this great title
I want to continue this and that is how
copyright started yeah but um you know
arguably it doesn't really really
benefit the creators as it is at the
moment and copyright probably does more
than P I think which are distinct but
yes I understand what you're saying um
and one of the things about the
law which copyright is of course as a
patent is that it's it's the weakest
level of control over what happens in
society
um there are basically four levels at
which things happen there's there's
people making rules you can't drive
faster than 50 km an hour here you're
allowed to eat meat on Fridays a whole
bunch of rules uh and some of those
rules are such that uh you'll actually
be grabbed and thrown in ja if you break
um so there's there's that level and
then sort of above that level is is the
level of Economics
now growing opum poppies is one of the
most sustainable profitable Industries
on Earth and yet it's against the law in
pretty much every country and the law
just basically can't do anything about
it of course it attacks of various
points in the chain but but the open
still gets through um and then above the
level of
Economics there's there's biology in
general um it here's an example uh
someone goes out to buy a pair of
training shoes and there's a pair for 40
quid and there's another pair for 87
but the pair with 87 have a little tick
on and the pair with 40 for 40 CR don't
have the little tick on and the person
buys the pair with a little tick on and
that doesn't make any economic sense
whatsoever according to the classical of
Economics they should buy the cheapest
one that does the job uh but of course
they're not buying a pair of training
shoes they're buying a peacock's de uh
that's a biological phenomenon that
we're looking at there and then above
the level of biology there's physics the
substrate on which everything is played
out um no biological organism has ever
hit on perpetual motion machine now you
might say that's simply because the
random combination of genes has never
quite made it made that made made that
come out in the mix but there's a m of
course which is that the perpetual
motion machine breaks the second LW
third Dynamics which is the single most
fundamental physical law that we know um
and so you've got these four levels and
copyright is right at the bottom and we
all know what happens to copyright we
all know many of us in this room they're
not all are old enough to remember what
happened when the MP3 music format was
invented suddenly copyright on music
evaporated almost open enough uh now
admittedly the music industry have now
dragged itself back to some sort of the
streaming models and so on which allows
them to well I was going to say to make
some money out of it in fact Spotify I
believe has never made made a profit um
and so we're now bumbling along in that
sort of copyright no copyright area
where music is concerned and of course
what's going to happen as reproducing
Technologies get better and better at
reproducing stuff um is that more and
more things are going to come into the
sphere that music currently finds itself
in what happens for example if you take
a copy of the film Gone With the Wind
and you show it to an AI and you get the
AI to prod a Gone With the Wind with
different actors in a different language
and different sets and possibly where
the different language is not the same
sentences translated just the ideas
going through is that copyright
infringement I said who
knows but I was telling sorry just a
quick thing on that I was telling n on
the way we were walking away walking
here um if you look on my Twitter stream
you'll find there's a thing there's a
thing of me about 2 minutes speaking
French um I don't speak French um well
I'm just about order a train ticket you
know um what I did there's a website
where you can I uploaded a video of
myself talking as I am now for 2 minutes
long and the website translated it into
French had me speak it with my own voice
and altered my lip movements to make the
lip sync look correct and you watch it
and it's me there are a couple of errors
in the translation but only if you speak
French would you spot them
um and it's pretty remarkable um now you
can do that with any movie if you can do
it with two minutes of me talking to my
laptop
camera